My name is Lena Groeger, and I work at ProPublica, an investigative newsroom in New York City.
My job is part developer, part designer, part reporter, part data analyst, and the team that I'm on builds interactive graphics, data visualizations, online search toold for big databases, etc.

Because we have so many options and resources now to tell stories in different waysm we are always thinking about how best to tell a story. What is the clearest way possible, the most impactful, the BEST method to convey a point or share a narrative?

In doing this, we come up with a lot of theories about what a user would want, what they can or cannot understand, what they expect. So in all these projects, we have to imagine how a "typical" person behaves. We have to become pretty much mind readers, peering into to other people's minds to see what works best for them.

And in general we tend to think that people's minds work pretty well, we might mess up sometimes but generally we're pretty rational and our behavior is predictable, right?

Wrong. Our minds are anything but rational, anything but predictable.
So today I want to talk about the ways our minds don't always work the way we expect them to, and how a better understanding of the strange quirks, oddities, and misbehavior of our minds can effect how we do our work – as data scientists, journalists, educators, or anyone trying to convey information.


1. Everyday Quirks
OUR BRAINS MAKE US ACT IN STRANGE WAYS.

Waiting in Line:

SOME years ago, executives at a Houston airport faced a troubling customer-relations issue. Passengers were lodging an inordinate number of complaints about the long waits at baggage claim. In response, the executives increased the number of baggage handlers working that shift. The plan worked: the average wait fell to eight minutes, well within industry benchmarks. But the complaints persisted.

Puzzled, the airport executives undertook a more careful, on-site analysis. They found that it took passengers a minute to walk from their arrival gates to baggage claim and seven more minutes to get their bags. Roughly 88 percent of their time, in other words, was spent standing around waiting for their bags.

So the airport decided on a new approach: instead of reducing wait times, it moved the arrival gates away from the main terminal and routed bags to the outermost carousel. Passengers now had to walk six times longer to get their bags. Complaints dropped to near zero.


The Average Investor

This also effects us when it comes to something we can all get emotional about: MONEY.
FIDELITY:

"an internal performance review of Fidelity accounts to determine which type of investors received the best returns between 2003 and 2013. The customer account audit revealed that the best investors were either dead or inactive—the people who switched jobs and “forgot” about an old 401(k) leaving the current options in place, or the people who died and the assets were frozen while the estate handled the assets."



What The Judge Ate for Breakfast

What you had for lunch:
LUNCH matters for parole

In a study of Israeli judges granting parole, it was found that the judge gave our much more favorable rulings (about 65% of the time) if they had just had lunch. You can see how the rullings drop off, getting less and less favorable until they go down to ZERO, as more time has past, and then shoot up as soon as the judge has a break to eat.


So judicial rulings are NOT based solely on laws and facts, but all sorts of things influence judicial rulings, even something as insignificant as “what the judge ate for breakfast” in sequential parole decisions made by experienced judges. We record the judges’ two daily food breaks, which result in segmenting the deliberations of the day into three distinct “decision sessions.” We find that the percentage of favorable rulings drops gradually from ≈65% to nearly zero within each decision session and returns abruptly to ≈65% after a break. Our findings suggest that judicial rulings can be swayed by extraneous variables that should have no bearing on legal decisions."


137 Point Scale

Thaler's example of redoing grade levels.

"Early in my teaching career I managed to get most of the students in my class mad at me. A midterm exam caused the problem.

I wanted the exam to sort out the stars, the average Joes and the duds, so it had to be hard and have a wide dispersion of scores. I succeeded in writing such an exam, but when the students got their results they were in an uproar. Their principal complaint was that the average score was only 72 points out of 100.

What was odd about this reaction was that I had already explained that the average numerical score on the exam had absolutely no effect on the distribution of letter grades. We employed a curve in which the average grade was a B+, and only a tiny number of students received grades below a C. I told the class this, but it had no effect on the students’ mood.

On the next exam, I raised the points available for a perfect score to 137. This exam turned out to be harder than the first. Students got only 70 percent of the answers right but the average numerical score was 96 points. The students were delighted!

I chose 137 as a maximum score for two reasons. First, it produced an average well into the 90s, and some students scored above 100, generating a reaction approaching ecstasy. Second, because dividing by 137 is not easy to do in your head, I figured that most students wouldn’t convert their scores into percentages.

Striving for full disclosure, in subsequent years I included this statement in my course syllabus: “Exams will have a total of 137 points rather than the usual 100. This scoring system has no effect on the grade you get in the course, but it seems to make you happier.” And, indeed, after I made that change, I never got a complaint that my exams were too hard."



Doctor 90-10 framing

Kahneman and Tversky also emphasized the importance of “framing.” Suppose that your doctor asks you to consider whether to have some operation for a serious illness, and he tells you that of 100 people who have that operation, 90 are alive after five years. You might well ask him to go forward. But suppose he tells you that of 100 people who have the operation, 10 are dead after five years. You might well hesitate. The influence of “frames” shows the pervasive impact of supposedly irrelevant factors (in Thaler’s shorthand, SIFs), which economic theory deems immaterial, but which can have a large effect on what people end up doing.


So clearly, trivial matters can effect how we make decisions and interpret information. But what about in the world of graphics?


2. Visual quirks
WHEN IT COMES TO VISUALS, THINGS GET STRANGER.

Judging a Face

Well, visual information carries a huge weight. Visual displays can also effect our decisions – subconsciously.

A study of Florida inmates found that regardless of the crime  committed, if their face was judged to be more "trustworthy", they got a lower sentece. If your face was not trustworthy, you were more likely to get the death penalty. And this was true even in cases were the accused was later found to be innocent!

"The perceived trustworthiness of an inmate’s face may determine the severity of the sentence he receives, according to new research using photos and sentencing data for inmates in the state of Florida. The research, published in Psychological Science, a journal of the Association for Psychological Science, reveals that inmates whose faces were rated as low in trustworthiness by independent observers were more likely to have received the death sentence than inmates whose faces were perceived as more trustworthy, even when the inmates were later exonerated of the crime."


Swayed by Brain Scans
Brains scans are taken as more credible in courtrooms
http://scienceline.org/2010/10/the-brain-scan-appeal/


Better Aim
Finally, simple visuals can have quite an unconcious effect on not only our minds and what we think, but also how we ACT.
In Amsterdam airport, to reduce mess and spillage in men's bathrooms, they came up with a solution that has now been copied all over the world: Put a little icon of a fly in the urinal, and men have much better aim!!
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=121310977


3. Making Better Graphics
USING THESE MIND ODDITIES TO BUILD BETTER GRAPHICS.

So... As data journalists, as scientists, as people who display data for a living, often in a visual way, what sorts of assumptions and intuitions do people carry when they see a chart or graphic?

Now, take note that I'm NOT saying that these things are "innate" or that they are hardwired in the brain to have this effect on our thinking and our actions. In fact, the way we read charts has been learned, take a look at how much explanation we used to need!!

NY Tribune 1849 Chart: We needed a whole paragraph description!
So reading a bar chart or line chart is a skill!

And we still have a ways to go:
Only 63% of Americans can read a scatter plot:
It doesn't really matter whether they are innate or somehow learned. Regardless, they have power.
Our intuitions are so strong they can lead us astray

Correlation != causation

Intuitions Are Strong: Line Chart vs Bar Chart

Clearly we have a lot of built in and learned intuitions about how to read charts, and we can use them to our advantage!


Cleveland and McGill 1984: A start!

Some examples of ways to do this:
Cartogram maps work because we've learned the shape of a country (and why it's harder in other countries). Although you'd be forgiven for thinking that Americans actually didn't know anything about geography.

Understand how we interpret graphics and take advantage of our minds capabilities and curiosities to display data:
Chernoff faces

"The point of Chernoff faces is to display multiple variables at once by positioning parts of the human face, such as ears, hair, eyes, and nose, based on numbers in a dataset. The assumption is that we can read people's faces easily in real life, so we should be able to recognize small differences when they represent data. Now that's a pretty big assumption, but debate aside, they're fun to make."


Workers comp.


4. Revealing Our Minds to US
OPTICAL ILLUSIONS HAVE LONG TAUGHT US ABOUT OUR BRAINS.

ILLUSIONS

Diffrent Blues Look the Same

Straight Lines Look Curved


A Staggered Start Doesn't Look Fair
“It’s easy to stare at the track just before the starting gun fires and wonder how the runner positioned all the way out in front in the outer lane of the track doesn’t have a huge advantage. Intellectually, we know that all the runners must run the same distance, but visually our eyes seem to deceive us. That so-called lead is called a stagger, and it’s meant to even the distance on an oval track. In a 400-meter race, there’s a gap of about six meters separating each runner.”

Ikea Nightmares

What About These Shades of Gray

Lines That Don't Look the Same Length

Tables that Don't Look the Same Size

A Dancer That Spins Both Ways

An Impossible Chocolate Bar

Blue or Gold?

Magic That Takes Advantage of Our Minds
Scientists are using tips from magicians to help them understand our minds

Magic trick techniques
We Follow Curves, we Jump to the End of Straight Lines


5. Teaching Us About Ourselves
USING GRAPHICS TO TEACH US ABOUT OUR OWN MINDS.


What I see as the next step, in addition to understanding how our brain reads and makes sense of graphics, is using graphics to reveal to us how our mind works. Instead of looking at how our minds inform our interpretation of graphics, I want to look at what I see as a growing trend in data visualization in newsrooms: using graphics to inform us of the quirks of our mind.

Showing Our Biases: Red vs Blue glasses

Revealing Difficult Concepts by Doing

Playing with Our Expectations: 3 Number Rule

Revealing Our Limitations: Number Guess
"It highlights the trouble that most people have in thinking more than one or two steps ahead."

Teaching Us a Lesson: Inequality game
A game in which you had to move different polygons from place to place, and simulated how even small individual biases can lead to huge collective biases, and shape society in a big way.
"Harmless, right? Every polygon would be happy with a mixed neighborhood. Surely their small bias can't affect the larger shape society that much? Well..."
And... our shape society becomes super segregated. Daaaaang.
Small individual bias can lead to large collective bias.






Stock market simulation game?










CURRENT EXAMPLES/FUTURE
Even better, use graphics to show people how their minds work!

Graphics that reveal the curiosities of our minds & science
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/10/05/business/economy/one-report-diverging-perspectives.html?_r=0

http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/science-isnt-broken/

http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/08/13/upshot/are-you-smarter-than-other-new-york-times-readers.html

Best behavioral science graphics: http://economicspsychologypolicy.blogspot.com/2013/12/the-15-best-behavioural-science-graphs.html




https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G-lN8vWm3m0
Invisible Gorilla
Diff Length Tables
Diff Color Grays
Curved Lines vs Straight
Dog pattern
http://www.nobeliefs.com/puzzles/illusions.htm
http://blog.crew.co/the-priming-effect-why-youre-less-in-control-of-your-actions-than-you-think/
